Possession, by Nicholas Delbanco (Morrow). One day in the life of Judah P. Sherbrooke, a rich, eccentric seventy-six-year-old Vermont farmer who lives with his eighty-one-year-old sister, Hattie, and who recently has decided to rewrite the dénouement of his life. Seven years earlier, Judah’s beautiful, charismatic, unfaithful wife left him, taking with her their only son. Now he has lured her back, and most of the book is about what happens when she arrives and about his recollections of the life they lived together. This is the boldest and most fully realized book Mr. Delbanco has written thus far. Both Judah and his sister, with her sweet tooth, her taciturn language, and her thin, proud life, are Grant Wood figures with speech, motion, and memories. Their tense conversations seem to have been carved from Vermont marble, and their feelings from some still harder substance. Decrepitude is overtaking them, but not without their putting up an admirable, touching struggle. Mr. Delbanco portrays the battle between spirit and flesh extremely well. As is always the case in his novels, however, there is a good deal of intrusive “poetic” writing (“She sang to him and her voice was gentle, he said, and he fed on the melody’s feast”), distracting writing (in this case, a nineteenth-century ancestor’s directions for building the very grand house that the sister and brother share is woven into the narrative, though it adds nothing to the story), and just plain silly writing (“So he glided on past her and mocked the world’s turning, playing his desire’s dervish and a top with a slack string”).
Oliver’s Story, by Erich Segal (Harper & Row). As our story opens, Oliver is still in deep mourning for his dead wife, Jenny. Will he ever recover? Will Phil, Jenny’s wisecracking father, ever be able to convince Oliver that he should rejoin the world and remarry? Will Marcie Nash, a beautiful, athletic business whiz who owns a chain of chic department stores, ever be able to take Jenny’s place? And will millions of readers once again overlook the clichés, the sentimentality, and the sophomoric language (“bod” for “body,” “preg” for “pregnant”) and send this sequel to “Love Story” to the top of the best-seller list? You bet your screenplay they will.
Note: “Yellow Roses,” a collection of short stories by Elizabeth Cullinan, has been published by Viking, and “In the Miro District,” a collection of short stories by Peter Taylor, has been published by Knopf. Much of the contents of both books originally appeared in The New Yorker.
Zarathustra‘s Sister: The Case of Elisabeth and Friedrich Nietzsche, by H.F. Peters (Crown). When Elisabeth Forster-Nietzsche died in 1935, at the age of eighty-nine, the Third Reich gave her what amounted to a state funeral. This woman, Nietzsche’s beloved sister Lieschen, who had nursed him through the last ten insane years of his life, had been custodian of the Nietzsche Archives in Weimar and, since the philosopher’s death in 1900, had been the ardent keeper of the Nietzsche flame and the editor of his collected works. She was also, as is now well known, his betrayer, for by forgery, suppressions, misinterpretations, and other manipulations of the writings and unpublished manuscripts she had so twisted and vulgarized his ideal of an aristocracy of the elite that he could be hailed by the Nazis as their greatest prophet. This book, by a German scholar long in America, relates the tortured love/hate story of Nietzsche and his sister. The story, however, is not entirely a matter of black and white: Nietzsche’s doctrines are too ambiguous, self-contradictory, and often obscure for that, and one cannot altogether blame simple but dishonest souls like Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche for taking them literally.
Northumbria in the Days of Bede, by Peter Hunter Blair (St. Martin’s). Mr. Blair, a Fellow of Emmanuel College, Cambridge, is a leading authority on Anglo-Saxon history, and in this book, written for a wider audience than his usual academic circle, he assembles and evaluates the tantalizingly meagre evidence that forms our knowledge of the early English kingdom (roughly, modern Yorkshire) whose most renowned citizen was the theologian and chronicler known as the Venerable Bede. Northumbria emerged around the seventh century from the barbarism that succeeded the Roman occupation, and was reduced again to barbarism by the Viking raiders of the ninth century “In this remote corner of a remote island, seeming so bleak until the Romantic poets with comfortable homes and plenty of wine taught us to see it otherwise,” Mr. Blair writes, “there was born out of barbarism a civilization which, for a brief century or so, itself gave the lead to others in the struggle to create something new upon the ruins of the old.” This civilization encompassed the blessings of a relative peace, the recovery of Christianity, and the rediscovery of knowledge (the nature of tides, the shape of the earth, the reckoning of time, and, of immense technological value, the lost art of making mortar), and the glimpse that Mr. Blair gives us is a fascinating one—all the more fascinating, perhaps, for being only a glimpse. Illustrated with photographs, drawings, and a map.
Somerset Maugham and His World, by Frederic Raphael (Scribners). A compact critical biography, amply illustrated with snapshots, movie stills, and other such memorabilia, but, oddly, set in a Lilliputian type that the most dedicated reader can barely make out. The small type is doubly unfortunate, because Mr. Raphael’s text is a shrewd and graceful one, which strives to be fair to Maugham’s achievement and judicial toward his cruelties. Maugham was trained as a doctor, and his writing has a clinical astringency: “His medical training, no less than his temperament, had taught him that one cannot diagnose accurately through a haze of sentiment and that the best analysis of a condition is achieved by those who have the nerve to swab aside the blood and look calmly at the wound.” Yet Mr. Raphael accepts in part the criticism of those who, like Edmund Wilson, have found Maugham to be something less than great: “Edmund Wilson’s charge abides, however one may seek to turn it aside: Maugham never understood how artists use English. He lived a life in translation; he did it brilliantly, but that is what he did.”
The Restless Journey of James Agee, by Geneviève Moreau, translated from the French by Miriam Kleiger and Morty Schiff (Morrow). This is the first attempt at a critical biography of the writer James Agee (1909-55)—an attempt not wholly achieved. Agee, who might be called an important American writer manqué, left no appreciable body of work—a few poems, a very few short stories, a journalistic account of the Depression South, a novel that had to be put in final shape by other hands, and a medley of book and movie reviews, topical essays, Time and Fortune pieces, film scripts. The author, a French scholar who specializes in American writing, admires Agee’s talent but does not know what to make of him as a man, and her difficulty is understandable. Agee was the loner in a crowd—a charmer on occasion, but for the most part a misanthrope, who became companionable only when drinking. He was at war with society and with himself; he was also an artist to his toes. Miss Moreau tries to thread her way through Agee’s messy life, but she often gets bogged down in irrelevancies.
Farewell Happy Fields, by Kathleen Raine (Braziller). This childhood memoir by the noted English poet is—no other word will do—insidious. The book at first appears ornamental, but in no time at all it becomes passionate, and the reader is caught up in a loving duel between the two sides of the author’s family—her Methodist schoolteacher father’s commitment to moral betterment and her mother’s almost pagan imagination. The scene changes from a minute Northumbrian village, which the child never wanted to leave, to a middle-class London suburb, where she never wanted to live, but the conflict continues, becoming ever more acute as Kathleen realizes how deeply she loves her father yet how incurably she is the child of her mother. Toward the end, we get the story of the author’s first love, a high-minded adolescent romance that is very funny because it was so very serious. ♦