Almost everyone's childhood is boring‐except one's own and Enid Bagnold's. At 80, she has written a splendid memoir, which seethes with a fledgling's energy, lunging back and forth among the decades. As a small girl, the future author of “Serena Blandish,” “National Vel vet,” “The Loved and Envied” and eight plays, including “The Chalk Garden” and “The Chinese Prime Minister,” was “tropically over developed” by early years in Jamai ca, “rowdy with health.” Descended from sea captains, with a great‐uncle Who saw flying saucers, she hated church, which made her “howl like a dog.” Still, “I rested my teeth on the wood of the pew in front as I knelt and prayed: ‘God, make me famous.’ “ In her teens, she nearly murdered a German headmistress who accused her of lifting a leg “to attract men.”

Gleefully aware of her own “self delight,” greedy for praise, she hur tled into experiences that were scarce for girls of her generation. She worked for Frank Harris, who told her, “Sex is the gateway to life,” and then took her through the gateway in an upstairs room at the Cafe Royal. It was the ritual—which suits many young girls—of initiation by a man not loved. For some years, she thought she'd rather be a mis tress than a wife, savoring “the sense of conquest, the trying‐out of oneself as though one were a sword.” Her first love was Prince Antoine Bibesco, who later told her that he'd loved her for three days. “A love affair has so few remembered in cidents. It only changes from good to bad.”

Eventually, she was bullied into marriage by Sir Roderick Jones, the head of Reuters; he nearly left her after their wedding‐night because he thought she kicked him in her sleep. “He could be furious with a foot stool,” while she was “untidy, dis obedient, conceited, arrogant, and self‐engrossed.” The evocations of their brawling marriage—“the truces, the fun, the love, the rage”—and her years with four children, two houses, stacks of servants, infinite (often un wanted) guests, and the necessity of writing for three hours every day, truly make family‐life sound worth while—as some can hardly believe it is today. Her husband said it was extraordinary “That we should be shut up together. And fight so hard. And make a success of it.”

However, the attendant elegance (and the frank snobbery) will make some readers uneasy. The footnotes are unsettling, thus: Nöel* / Nöel* Coward; Juliet Duff*/*Lady Juliet Duff. And the dining room with pil lars, sofas with dolphins and angels and garlands, Dresden mirrors, all that poshness and privilege can prompt the rebellion that many now feel against possessions, plus the sus picion of roots, and the recoil from blood‐relations. Still, these reactions oddly heighten the value of these memoirs—as history. Now, when many feel that ownership is cor rupting, and that whatever people accumulate (including relatives) must be junked soon, the mere concept of continuity is amazing. She recom mends it.

Throughout, Miss Bagnold's friends and acquaintances leap to life in a few words: Edith Evans as “a stupid genius,” or the unnamed director who had “the swift, offended fury of a man who had been wounded before in his life. His scars flushed easily,” or the eccentric Oliver de Reuter, who once ripped off and threw away the whites of the fried eggs he'd ordered in a restaurant: “there stood a waiter with a plate ready to catch them. ‘Since the womb,’ said Oliver, ‘I have not eaten albumen!” Her descriptions of mad ness are painfully brilliant, as a character snaps out of sanity and can't return.

There are devastating passages on failure in the theatre—“The Ob server critic (a nice man, I hear) wrote as though he had seen vomit on the stage”—and reflections on the compulsion to keep going: “Who wants to become a writer? And why? Because it's the answer to every thing.... To uselessness. It's the streaming reason for living. To note, to pin down, to build up, to create, to be astonished at nothing, to cherish the oddities, to let nothing go down the drain, to make something, to make a great flower out of life, even if it's a cactus.” Some of her para graphs are too rich for quotation: they ought to be recited.

As in “The Chinese Prime Minis ter,” she has “written of age as a special landscape;... curious, not devoid of pleasure, a time for ad venture (when the duties got less).” Nearly all of her pages suggest fur ther essays or chapters: one hopes that many more will follow, in her style of “conveying the incredible as though it was credible—or convey ing the truth as though it was incredible.”

Illustrated. 382 pp, Boston: Atlantic‐Little, Brown. $8.95.

Miss Sayre is the New York cor respondent for New Statesman.