HIT the ROAD, MAX
LucasArts Takes To The Highway With Sam & Max

by Charles Ardai

Sam and Max, readers of Steve Purcell's comic scrips will know, are a couple of weird-looking, sarcastic, gleefully subversive guys who have roughly as much respect for cows of the sacred variety as Beefsteak Charlie has for the ordinary sort. They delight in puncturing pomposity, exposing the tacky underbelly of our fine nation to the ridicule it both invites and deserves, and generally behaving like a pair of willfully malicious imps. They remind me of my friends.
They are also, respectively, a laconic, suit-wearing dog and a hyperactive, misshapen rabbit. In this regard they do not resemble my friends. My friends are not laconic.

If I like my friends, it would seem to follow that I must also like Sam and Max, and probably the new LucasArts game in which they make their software debut, Sam & Max Hit the Road-- and, in fact, I do. However, I have to admit to liking it measurably less than LucasArts' previous foray into cartoon-inspired comedy, Day of the Tentacle. 

Tentacle felt like an old Looney Tunes short, complete with pratfalls, goofy gags, and scads of silliness. Sam & Max has its share of pratfalls, too, but it feels less like a Warner Brothers cartoon and more like an underground comic book. To begin with, the art is more edgy and raw. (Sam is a closer cousin to Matt Groening's "Bongo" from the "Life In Hell" strip than to Bugs Bunny.) The music is quietly unnerving jazz instead of rousing calliope schtick. Some of the plot material the game introduces is chancier than a mainstream cartoon would permit, the images more scabrous, the jokes more adult. ("Every time I catch enough fish to fill my net," one character complains, "a helicopter swoops down and carries the fish off ... It's like berng stuck in a Norman Mailer novel.")

While, on the whole, I believe that the designers should be commended for taking a chance with material that 
is certain to appeal to a smaller audience than they  might have reached with something easier or more accessible, it is a gamble that does not always pay off. There is a reason that mainstream is more popular than underground, no matter what field you are discussing: it is more fun and less "in your face"; it’s calculated to entertain rather than to disconcert. 

For the sake of comparison, consider the field of professional magic. More people like David Copperfield than Penn & Teller, a duo who resemble Sam and Max in many ways. Why? Because even if you enjoy their style and appreciate that they are less conservative and predictable than Copperfield, Penn & Teller can be hard to take after a while.

Self-referential jokes, sneering remarks, deadpan derision, sarcasm, and ridicule can all be funny, but only to a point. Push the point too far and you can give the impression of the party guest trying too hard to be "on," the comedian who doesn't know when to let up, or the teenage boor with a wisecrack for every situation.

It is probably not very useful to psychoanalyze cartoon characters, but Sam and Max are a pair of aggressive little buggers who vent gobs of latent hostility and alienation in their obnoxious running commentary on everything they encounter. They are constantly egging each other on, trying to top each other in cleverness and sang-froid, and it tries one's patience. Not that the obnoxious remarks aren't funny, if you go for that sort of thing-- they often made me laugh out loud, but enough is enough, and what is funny for the duration of a ten-panel comic strip starts to grate after a few hours of gameplay.

Play It Again, Sam

The gameplay itself is solid. LucasArts has renovated its SCUMM game engine by removing the inventory and command icons from the screen, allowing the whole space co be occupied by graphics. The result is that there is room for the characters to be drawn large and in detail; this, plus the elimination of the "interface frame" surrounding the graphics, helps break down the barrier between the player and the action. It's one more step, and not a negligible one, toward allowing gamers to "play a cartoon."

Players still select from the usual command icons (Walk, Talk, Use, Take, Look), which they cycle through by clicking the eight mouse button. Clicking on a cardboard box stowed in one corner of the screen calls up one's inventory; any of the objects one has collected can then be picked up and used as command icons themselves. (It is worth mentioning that, once again, LucasArts has come up with some of the cleverest and best-drawn icons in the business. What these guys can conjure up in less than a half-inch of space is incredible.)
Perhaps the most novel element of the gameplay is the way in which conversations are handled. When the player clicks the "clacking teeth" icon on a character, a row of dialogue and subject icons appears across che bottom of the screen.

Instead of choosing from lines of dialogue, as in Tentacle, the player selects a type of speech act-- question, exclamation, non sequitur-- or else chooses icons representing characters and events in the game. This
allows the game's writets to continually surprise the player with their context-sensitive witticisms, rather than displaying a list of gag lines in a bland menu format. The technique adds spice already in the floppy-disk version of the game; when the inevitable CD-ROM version comes out, replacing printed text with speech, the degree to which the new system improves interactive conversations should be even more apparent.

Extensive use of spoken-word audio will also help in a less obvious way. Some of the dialogue text, which is color coded to indicate who is speaking, is hard to read against some backgrounds. Sam's brown text is especially prone to illegibility, while Max's white letters can be eye-searing if your monitor's bright-ness is turned a notch too high. Replacing text with audio should eliminate the problem.
Of course, different color schemes or some kind of letter shadowing could also h.we eliminated the problem, and the fuct that they weren't used suggests (mildly) inadequate forethought on LucasArts' part. There are other examples, too. Consider one quirk of cycling through icons rather than selecting them from a menu: if one attempts to use an object on someone or something inappropriate, the compurcr jumps the cycle back co the default "walk" icon, requiring the player to click several times in order to bring up the object again for .mother try. Or consider the peculiarities of icon placement: sometimes, if you wane to look at Max (for instance), placing the "eye" icon eight on top of Max will not work, while placing it above Max's head will.
None of the above interferes with gameplay to a serious extent, bur it is needlessly annoying. The new interface would need some tweaking, therefore, before I could recommend it unreservedly.

Hare Of The Dog

Less easily tweakable is the game's storyline, a rambling, picaresque mishmash centered around the pursuit of an AWOL sasquatch who has vanished from a New England freak show. Sam and Max, "freelance police" by trade, are called upon to track down Bruno the Bigfoot and, while they are at it, Trixie the Giraffe-Necked Girl, who vanished on the same day. They undertake this mission by poking around the freak show's vauous cents and trailers and (for no apparent reason) a chain of discount grub-hues called "Snuckey's." Their investigation leads them co a series of tourist traps around the country such as "The World's Largest Ball of Twine" (where they have to chat up a psychic and steal a mood ring) and "The World of Fish" (where they have to pilfer a pailful of fish and then disguise themselves as a giant trout).

Along the way there are lots of weird characters to talk with (my favorite being the painfully loquacious Doug the Mole Man) and puzzles to solve. The latter tend not to be very hard, particularly since the characters periodically give the player a nudge in the right direction. ("I'm sure this is somehow useful," Sam says at one point, pointmg to a set of binoculars. "I think we're supposed to do something in there," says Max at another, as they exit the carnival's Tunnel of Love ride.) The hardest puzzles are the ones that require the player to use Max as a tool, since it is not obvious just what he is useful for. 

At various times, you have to use him as an intertogator, a circuit breaker, and a knife; the best heuristic to keep in mind is, "When all else fails, try using Max."

Other sequences that some players may find difficult include the two action sequences that must be completed successfully to finish the game, "Wak-A-Rac" and "Gator Golf." The former has Sam pounding cats with a hammer at the carnival; quick
and accurate placement of the mouse is key to passing this hurdle. The latter has Sam whacking fish into a gator-infested swamp in order to build a bridge between the shore and the island on which Max is imprisoned. Dexterity is less crucial here, but it takes a while to figure out how to get the gators to move where you want them to.

Sam & Max also contains a handful of optional sub-games, including a version of "Battleship" called "CatBomb," a coloring book, a set of Sam and Max dress-up dolls, and a simple driving/jumping game called "Highway Surfing." Of these, only the last (in which the player can get up to Level 7 or thereabouts just by sitting back and doing nothing) is weak. None of them have anything to do with the game's story, however, and their presence (along with that of a bunch of screen savers that kick in if you don't do anything for a few minutes) contribute to the feeling chat Sam & Max is more a computerized busybox-- not unlike the very toad trip "activity books" the designers satirize at every turn-than a unified, focused piece of fiction.

To The Max

However gonzo Day of the Tentacle got, it was always grounded in a very clear and well-developed storyline and it made sure we cared about the characters and their plight. Sam & Max is all over the map, literally; its main charcters are basically jerks; and the quest they are on is of no significance even to them. So, although individual scenes in the game can be quite funny, the whole is rather less than the sum of its parts. Day of the Tentacle was that rarest of all creations, one in which everything came together perfectly. Sam & Max is fine, but lesser. It's like the difference between Raiders of the Lost Ark and Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom-- or between the original Maniac Mansion and its lackluster follow-up, Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders.

Gamers ravenous for a LucasArts fix after finishing Tentacle will find that Sam & Max affords a couple of hours of somewhat similar amusement. Endlessly sarcastic New York intellectuals like my friends will find its tone wholly agreeable, but whether it plays in Peoria remains to be seen. Sam & Max marches to a different drummer. You'll have to decide if you can dance to its irregular beat.

